📜 Business Rules
Automated Employee Onboarding & Offboarding System

Business rules define the non-negotiable policies and logic that control how onboarding, offboarding, access, and employee lifecycle operations must behave in the system.

They ensure consistency, compliance, and security enforcement across HR, IT, and IAM systems.

1. Core Principle

Business rules act as a policy layer above code:

User Action → Business Rule Validation → Workflow Execution → System Response

If a rule fails → the action is blocked or redirected.

2. Employee Lifecycle Rules
2.1 Onboarding Rules
An employee must have a unique employee ID
Email must be unique across the system
Onboarding cannot start without HR approval
Mandatory documents must be completed before activation
Access provisioning only occurs after onboarding initiation
IF employee_exists(email) → REJECT onboarding
IF hr_approval == false → BLOCK workflow
IF mandatory_docs_missing → PAUSE onboarding
2.2 Activation Rules
Employee status becomes ACTIVE only when:
All onboarding tasks are completed
IAM provisioning is successful
Manager approval is recorded
IF tasks_complete AND access_granted AND approved
→ SET status = ACTIVE
2.3 Offboarding Rules
Offboarding must be approved by both HR and Manager
Access must be revoked BEFORE employee status changes to EXITED
No new access can be granted after exit request is approved
IF exit_requested AND NOT approved → BLOCK
IF status = EXITED → DENY all access requests
IF access_not_revoked → HOLD status change
3. Access Control Rules
3.1 Role-Based Access Rules
Users can only access resources assigned to their role
No cross-role privilege escalation allowed
Temporary roles expire automatically
IF user_role NOT IN allowed_roles → DENY access
IF attempt_privilege_escalation → LOG + BLOCK
3.2 Least Privilege Rule
Every employee receives minimum required permissions
Additional access must be explicitly approved
ASSIGN permissions = MINIMUM_REQUIRED(role)
3.3 Sensitive System Access Rule
Admin-level access requires MFA
Financial or HR data access requires dual approval
4. Data Integrity Rules
Employee ID must be unique and immutable
Email cannot be reused even after exit (for audit safety)
Foreign keys must always be valid
IF duplicate_employee_id → REJECT
IF invalid_reference → BLOCK transaction
5. Workflow Rules
5.1 State Transition Rules
CREATED → ONBOARDING → ACTIVE → EXIT_REQUESTED → EXITED

Invalid transitions are blocked.

Example:

ACTIVE → ONBOARDING ❌ not allowed
EXITED → ACTIVE ❌ not allowed
5.2 SLA Rules
Onboarding must complete within X days (e.g., 3–5 days)
IT provisioning must complete within 24 hours
Offboarding access revocation must be immediate
6. Security Rules
All sensitive actions require authentication + authorization
Session timeout after inactivity
API access requires valid token
All admin actions must be logged
IF no_auth OR invalid_token → DENY request
IF admin_action → LOG mandatory
7. Document Rules
NDA must be signed before system access
Offer letter must exist before onboarding starts
Exit clearance required before final settlement
IF NDA_signed == false → BLOCK access
IF offer_letter_missing → BLOCK onboarding
8. Time-Based Rules
Inactive users (>30 days) are auto-disabled
Exited employees archived after retention period
Pending approvals auto-expire after defined SLA
9. Notification Rules
Notify HR on onboarding completion
Notify IT on access requests
Notify manager on task completion delays
Notify security on failed login attempts
10. Exception Handling Rules
If IAM system fails → retry 3 times before escalation
If workflow fails → rollback transaction
If data mismatch → block update and raise alert
IF system_failure → RETRY(3)
IF retry_failed → ESCALATE
11. Compliance Rules
All actions must be audit-logged
Data retention must follow policy duration
Sensitive data must be encrypted
Access history must be traceable
12. Automation Enforcement Rules
Rules are evaluated BEFORE workflow execution
Violations stop execution immediately
Rule engine runs synchronously for critical actions
13. Rule Evaluation Flow
Request Received
   ↓
Check Business Rules
   ↓
If PASS → Execute Workflow
   ↓
If FAIL → Block + Log + Notify
